CHAPTER 4
WARSAW, SEPTEMBER 1, 1939
JUST BEFORE DAWN, ANTONINA WOKE TO THE DISTANT SOUND
of gravel pouring down a metal chute, which her brain soon deciphered as
airplane engines. Let them be Polish planes on maneuver, she prayed as she went
onto the terrace and scouted a strange sunless sky, veiled as she'd never seen it
before, not with clouds but a thick golden-white gloss hanging low on the
ground like a curtain, yet not smoke, not fog, and stretching along the horizon
from rim to rim. A veteran of World War I and a reserve officer, Jan had spent
the night on duty, but she didn't know where, just "somewhere outside the zoo,"
in the city canyons beyond the mental moat of the Vistula.
She heard "the hum of planes, tens, maybe even hundreds," that sounded like
"faraway surf, not a calm surf but when waves crash onto the beach during a
storm." Listening a moment longer, she detected the telltale unsynchronized hum
of German bombers that Londoners, later in the war, swore they heard
grumbling, Where are you? Where are you? Where are you?
Jan returned home by 8 A.M., agitated and with only sketchy information.
"Those won't be the practice maneuvers we were told about," he said. "They'll be
bombers, Luftwaffe squadrons escorting the approaching German army. We've
got to leave right away." With Ryś and his nanny safe in Rejentówka, they
decided to head first to the nearer village of Zalesie, where his cousins lived, but
waited for further updates on the radio.
This was the first day of the school year for Polish children, a day when the
sidewalks should have been streaming with school uniforms and knapsacks.
From the terrace, they saw Polish soldiers sprinting in all directions—down the
streets, over lawns, even into the zoo—erecting balloon barriers, aligning
antiaircraft guns, and piling long black cannon shells tapered at one end like
animal droppings.
The zoo animals seemed unaware of danger. Small fires didn't scare them—
for years they'd trusted the sight of household bonfires—but they grew alarmed
by the sudden flood of soldiers, because the only humans they'd ever seen in
early morning were the dozen or so blue-uniformed keepers, usually with food.
The lynxes began gargling a sound between roar and meow, the leopards chug
chugged low notes, the chimpanzees yipped, the bears brayed like donkeys, and
the jaguar sounded as though it were hacking up something lodged in its throat.
By 9 A.M., they'd learned that, to justify invasion, Hitler had staged a phony
attack on the German border town of Gleiwitz, where SS troops dressed in
Polish uniforms commandeered a local radio station and broadcast a fake call to
arms against Germany. Although foreign journalists imported to witness the
events were shown dead bodies of prisoners (dressed in Polish uniforms) as
proof of hostilities, no one fell for the charade. Still, even such a hoax couldn't
go unanswered, and at 4 A.M. Germany's battleship Schleswig-Holstein
bombarded an ammunition depot near Gdańsk, and Russia's Red Army started
preparing to invade from the east.
Antonina and Jan packed hurriedly and set out on foot across the bridge,
hoping to make their way to Zalesie, beyond the Vistula River and only a dozen
miles to the southeast. As they approached Zbawiciel Square, the engine noise
ground louder and then planes floated overhead, appearing in the gap between
the rooftops like stereopticon slides. Bombs whistled down and struck a few
streets in front of them, with black smoke followed by the crackling of shattered
stucco roof tiles and the rasp of brick and mortar crumbling.
Every bomb creates a different scent, depending on where it hits, what it
boils into aerosol and the nose detects slipping apart, as molecules mix with air
and float free. Then the nose can pick up ten thousand distinctive scents, from
cucumber to violin resin. When a bakery was hit, the rising dirt cloud smelled of
yeast sours, eggs, molasses, and rye. The mingled odors of cloves, vinegar, and
burning flesh spelled the butcher's. Charred flesh and pine meant an incendiary
bomb that blasted houses with a hot, fast fire, and that the people inside had died
quickly.
"We've got to turn back," Jan said, and they ran past the walls of Old Town
and across the whistling metal bridge. At the zoo once more, Antonina noted: "I
was so depressed that I couldn't do anything. I could only hear Jan's voice
directing his staff: 'Bring a cart with horses, load it with food and coal, pack
warm clothes, and go immediately. . ..'"
FOR JAN, THE PUZZLE of finding a town of no military interest posed an
equation littered with unknowns he wasn't prepared for, since neither he nor
Antonina had thought the Germans would invade Poland. They'd worried, but
agreed "it was only fear speaking": a private siege, not signs of an impending
war. Antonina wondered how they could have guessed so wrong, and Jan
concentrated on hiding his family somewhere safe while he remained at the zoo
to tend the animals as long as possible and await orders.
"Warsaw will soon be closed," he reasoned, "and the German army is
advancing from the east, so I think it's best if you return to the cottage in
Rejentówka."
She pondered this, then decided, despite misgivings: "Yes, at least it's a place
we know, one Ryś associates with good times." Really, she had no idea, but
persisted in packing, relying on Jan's hunch, then climbed into a cart loaded for
what might be a long absence, and set out quickly before the roads grew too
crowded.
The resort village of Rejentówka lay only about twenty-five miles away, but
Antonina and a cart driver spent seven hours en route, sharing the dirt road with
thousands of people, mainly on foot, since cars, trucks, and most horses had
been confiscated by the military. Women, children, and old men hurried along in
a worried trance, escaping the city with whatever they could carry, some pushing
baby buggies, wagons, and hand trolleys, some hauling suitcases and small
children, but most wearing several layers of clothing, with knapsacks, bags, and
shoes slung across their bodies or swinging from their necks.
Flanking the road, tall poplars, pine, and spruce juggled large brown balls of
mistletoe in their limbs; and black-and-white storks nested atop the telephone
poles, still fattening up for their arduous flight to Africa. Soon farm fields
quilted both sides of the road, grain glistening and tassels pointing skyward.
Antonina wrote of sweat pouring in rivulets and breath bunching, the air clotted
with dust.
A storm's distant rumble became a cloud of gnats on the horizon, then grew
to German aircraft looming near in seconds, chewing up the skies, flying low
overhead, panicking people and horses alike. Pelted by bullets, everyone hurried
through clouds of flying dirt, the unlucky fell, and the relatively lucky fled
beneath splattering machine-gun fire. Dead storks, redwings, and rooks littered
the road along with tree branches and dropped satchels. Catching a bullet was
sheer chance and for seven hours Antonina beat the odds, but not without scenes
of the dead and dying etched into memory.
At least her son, in Rejentówka, was spared these images, so hard to erase,
especially for a small child whose brain, busily sampling the world, was learning
what to expect and stitching those truths in place at a trillion connections. Stay
prepared for this world the rest of your life, a child's brain tells itself, a world of
mayhem and uncertainty. "That which doesn't kill you, makes you stronger,"
Nietzsche wrote in The Twilight of the Idols, as if the will could be annealed like
a Samurai sword that is heated and pounded, bent and reforged, until it becomes
indestructible. But the metal of a little boy, what does the pounding do to him?
Mixed with Antonina's worry about her son was moral outrage that the Germans
"in this modern war, so different from wars we knew, allowed the killing of
women, children, and civilians."
As the dust settled, blue sky returned and she noticed two Polish fighters
attacking a heavy German bomber above a field. From afar, the geometry of the
scene looked homely, like fierce wrens driving off a hawk, and people cheered
whenever the fighters stung the bomber with tufts of smoke. Surely an air force
that agile could repel the Luftwaffe? Threads of tinsel flashed in the waning
sunlight, and suddenly the bomber gushed a fountain of blood-red flames and
fell to earth in a sharp curve. Then a white jellyfish floated above the peaks of
the pine trees: a German pilot swaying under his parachute, slowly descending
through a cornflower-blue sky.
Like many Poles, Antonina didn't realize the magnitude of danger, relying
instead on a Polish air force that boasted superbly trained and famously
courageous pilots (especially those of the Pursuit Brigade defending Warsaw),
whose outnumbered, obsolete PZL P.11 fighters posed no match for Germany's
fast, swervy Junkers JU-87 Stukas. Polish Karas bombers swooped low over
German tanks at such a slow speed, while flying level, that they fell easy prey to
antiaircraft fire. She didn't know that Germany was testing out a new form of
combined-arms warfare which would come to be called Blitzkrieg (lightning
war), a charge-in-with-everything-you've-got—tanks, planes, cavalry, artillery,
infantry—to surprise and terrify the enemy.
When she finally arrived in Rejentówka, she found a ghost town with
summer guests gone, shops shuttered for the season, and even the post office
closed. Exhausted, rattled, and dirty, she rode to the cottage hemmed in by tall
trees and luminous quiet, in a setting that smelled familiar and safe, full of the
mingled aromas of loam, meadow herbs and wild grasses, decaying wood and
pine oil. One can picture her hugging Ryś hard and greeting his nanny; eating a
dinner of buckwheat, potatoes, and soup; unpacking; bathing; longing for the
habitual routines of just another summer, but unable to calm her nerves or quell
her sense of foreboding.
Over the next few days, they often stood on the porch watching waves of
German planes, en route to Warsaw, blacken the sky in lines neat as hedgerows.
The regularity addled her: each day planes swarmed above at 5 A.M. and again
after sunset, without her knowing whom exactly they had bombed.
The local landscape looked strange, too, since Rejentówka wasn't a spot they
visited in autumn, without vacationers and pets. Tall lindens had begun turning
bronze and oaks the burnt maroon of stale blood, while some green survived on
the maples, where yellow-bellied evening grosbeaks fed on winged seeds. Along
the sandy roads, staghorn sumac shrubs raised antler-velvet twigs and cone
shaped clusters of hairy red fruits. Blue chicory, brown cat-o'-nine-tails, white
dame's rocket, pink thistle, orange hawkweed, and goldenrod tuned the meadows
to fall, in a tableau that changed whenever a breeze bent the stems like a hand
gliding over a plush carpet.
On September 5, Jan arrived by train, his face somber, to find Antonina
"very depressed and confused."
"I've heard rumors that a wing of the German army, invading from East
Prussia, will soon reach Rejentówka," he told her. "But the front hasn't arrived in
Warsaw yet, and people are slowly getting used to the air raids. Our army is
bound to protect the capital at all costs, so we may as well return home."
Even if he didn't sound altogether convinced, Antonina agreed, in part
because Jan was a good strategist whose hunches usually panned out, but she
also thought how much easier life would be if they could stay together, sharing
comforts, worries, and fears. Traveling the main road again was out of the
question.
At night, they boarded a slow train with blackened windows and arrived in
civil morning twilight, the hour of brightening before the sun spills over the
horizon, in a lull between the night and dawn raids. According to Antonina,
horses awaited them at the station and they rode home bewitched by the
everyday—windless calm, damp air, aster hedges, colorful leaves, squeaky axles,
clopping hooves on cobblestone—and, for a short spell, they slipped into the
premechanized past, sinking deep into a pristine stillness where the war seemed
to her muffled and unreal, only a remote glow like the moon.
At the main gate in Praga, the toll smacked her wide awake again as she
dismounted. Bombs had ripped up the asphalt, shells had bitten large chunks out
of the wooden buildings, cannon wheels had furrowed the lawns, old willows
and lindens dangled unplugged limbs. Antonina held Ryś tight, as if the
desolation before her were communicable. Unfortunately, the zoo edged a river
with busy bridges, prime German targets, and with a Polish battalion stationed
there, it had made a superb target, repeatedly, over several days. Picking their
way through debris, they walked to the villa and its bomb-cratered yard.
Antonina's eyes fell to the flower beds crushed from the hooves of horses, and
she fixed on the small delicate calyxes of flowers stomped into the ground "like
colorful teardrops."
Just after dawn, the day and battle started heating up. Standing on the front
porch, they were surprised by the canyon echoing of hoarse explosions and
snapping iron girders. Suddenly the ground trembled and walked under their
feet, and they hurried indoors, only to find the roof beams, floors, and walls all
shaking. The moaning of lions and yowling of tigers spiraled from the big cat
house, where she knew cat mothers, "crazy with fear, were grabbing their young
by the scruff of the neck and pacing their cages, anxiously looking for a safe
place to hide them." The elephants trumpeted wildly, the hyenas sobbed in a
frightened sort of giggle interrupted by hiccups, the African hunting dogs
howled, and the rhesus monkeys, agitated beyond sanity, battled one another,
their hysterical shrieks clawing the air. Despite the uproar, workers continued to
carry water and food to the animals and check their cage bars and locks.
In this Luftwaffe attack, a half-ton bomb destroyed the polar bears'
mountain, smashing the walls, moats, and barriers and freeing the terrified
animals. When a platoon of Polish soldiers found the panicky bears, ribboned
with blood and circling round their old haunt, they quickly shot them. Then,
fearing lions, tigers, and other dangerous animals might escape, too, the soldiers
decided to kill the most aggressive ones, including the male elephant, Jaś,
Tuzinka's father.
Watching from the front porch, Antonina had a good view across the
grounds to where Polish soldiers gathered beside a well, with several zoo
workers crowding around them, one crying, the others grim and silent.
"How many animals have they already killed?" she asked herself.
Events were unfolding without time to protest or grieve, and the surviving
animals needed help, so she and Jan joined the keepers in feeding, doctoring, and
calming animals as best they could.
"At least humans can pack their essentials, keep moving, keep improvising,"
Antonina thought. "If Germany occupies Poland, what will become of the
delicate life-form of the zoo?. . .The zoo animals are in a much worse situation
than we are," she lamented, "because they're totally dependent on us. Moving the
zoo to a different location is unimaginable; it's too complex an organism." Even
if war should erupt and end fast, the aftermath would be costly, she told herself.
Where would they find food and money to keep the zoo afloat? Trying not to
picture the worst scenario, she and Jan nonetheless bought extra supplies of hay,
barley, dried fruits, flour, dried bread, coal, and wood.
On September 7, a Polish officer knocked at the front door and formally
ordered all able-bodied men to join the army fighting on a northwestern front—
which included forty-two-year-old Jan—and all civilians to vacate the zoo at
once. Antonina packed quickly and traveled with Ryś back across the river, this
time to stay with her sister-in-law in the west part of the city, in a fourth-floor
apartment at No. 3 Kapucyńska Street.
