CHAPTER 5
AT NIGHT, IN THE SMALL FLAT ON KAPUCYŃSKA STREET, SHE
learned a new noise: the anvil blows of German artillery. Somewhere else,
women her age were slinking into nightclubs and dancing to the music of Glenn
Miller, bouncy tunes with names like "String of Pearls" and "Little Brown Jug."
Others were dancing to the newly invented jukebox at roadside joints. Couples
were hiring babysitters and going to the cinema to see 1939's new releases: Greta
Garbo in Ninotchka, Jean Renoir's The Rules of the Game, Judy Garland in The
Wizard of Oz. Families were driving through the countryside to view the fall
leaves and eat apple cake and corn fritters at harvest festivals. For many Poles,
life had become residue, what remains after evaporation drains the juice from the
original. During occupation, everyone lost the many seasonings of daily life,
trapped in a reality where only the basics mattered and those bled most of one's
energy, time, money, and thoughts.
Like other animal mothers, she grew desperate to find a safe hiding place for
her young, "but unlike them," she wrote in her diary, "I can't carry Ryś in my
jaws to a safe nest." Nor could she remain in her sister-in-law's fourth-floor
apartment—"What if the building collapses and we can't escape?" Maybe it was
best, she decided, to resettle downstairs, where a small store sold lampshades—
that is, if she could persuade the owners to take her in.
Gathering up Ryś, she climbed down the four flights of dark stairs and
knocked on a door which opened to reveal two elderly women, Mrs. Caderska
and Mrs. Stokowska.
"Come in, come in." They glanced around the hallway after her and quickly
fastened the door.
A strange new continent, half coral reef, half planetarium, veered into view
as she entered a cluttered shop redolent with the odors of fabric, glue, paint,
sweat, and cooking oatmeal. A bazaar of lampshades hung from the ceiling,
nested together in ziggurats or huddled like exotic kites. Wooden shelves held
strudel-like bolts of fabric, brass frames, hand tools, screws, rivets, and gleaming
trays of finials separated by substance: glass, plastic, wood, metal. In such shops
of the era, women sewed new fabric shades by hand, repaired old shades, and
sold some made by others.
As Antonina's eyes traveled the room, she would have seen fixtures popular
during the 1930s, a time when Baltic decor ran from Victorian to Art Deco and
modernist, and included shades such as these: tulip-shaped rose silk decorated
with chrysanthemum brocade; green chiffon with lace inset panels of white
sateen; geometrically shaped pleated ivory; bright yellow panels in the shape of
Napoleon's hat; eight-sided perforated metal with faceted faux jewels inserted
around the skirt; dark amber mica crowning a plaster globe embossed with Art
Nouveau archers pursuing a stag; a dome of orange-red glass bumpy as
gooseflesh, skirted with crystal pendants, below which hung a brass gondola
embossed with ivy scrolling. That fashionable red glass, known as gorge-de
pigeon, and often used in European wine goblets in Antonina's time, shone sour
cherry red when dark, and when lit, cast a glow the color of freshly peeled blood
oranges. It was dyed with pigeon blood, an elixir also used to grade high-quality
rubies (with the best stones resembling the freshest blood).
Ryś drew her attention to the far side of the room where, to her surprise,
disheveled women and children from the neighborhood sat hedged in by shades.
"Dzień dobry, dzień dobry, dzień dobry," Antonina greeted each woman in
turn.
Something about the cozy atmosphere of the lampshade store drew the
displaced and bone-chilled to this shop run by grandmotherly ladies willing to
share their pantry, coal, and bedding. As Antonina noted,
This lampshade store and workshop was like a magnet to so many people.
Thanks to these two tiny lovely old ladies, who were extremely
warmhearted, full of love and kindness, we survived this terrible time.
They were like the warm light during the summer night, and people from
upstairs, homeless people from other locations, from destroyed buildings,
even from other streets, were gathering like moths attracted by the warmth
around these two ladies.
Antonina marveled as their wrinkled hands passed out food (mainly
oatmeal), sweets, a postcard album, and little games. Every night when people
chose their spot to sleep, she lay a mattress under a sturdy doorframe and
sheltered Ryś with her body, snatching sleep as though falling down a well, as
her past grew more idyllic and floated farther away. She had had so many plans
for the coming year; now she wondered if she and Ryś would survive the night,
if she'd live to see Jan again, if her son would celebrate another birthday. "Every
day of our life was full of thoughts of the horrible present, and even our own
death," she wrote in her memoirs, adding:
Our allies were not here, not helping us—we Poles were all alone [when]
one English attack on the Germans could stop the constant bombing of
Warsaw. . .. We were receiving very depressing news about our Polish
government—our Marshal Śmigly and members of the government had
escaped to Romania and were captured and arrested. We felt betrayed,
shocked, we were grieving.
When Britain and France declared war on Germany, Poles rejoiced and radio
stations played the French and British national anthems endlessly for days, but
mid-September brought no relief from the relentless bombing and heavy
artillery. "Living in a city under siege," Antonina wrote disbelievingly in her
memoirs, a city full of whistling bombs, jarring explosions, the dry thunder of
collapse, and hungry people. First routine comforts like water and gas
disappeared, then radio and newspapers. Whoever dared the streets only did so at
a run, and people risked their lives to stand in line for a little horsemeat or bread.
For three weeks she heard shells zinging over rooftops by day and bombs
pounding on walls of darkness at night. Chilling whistles preceded horrible
booms, and Antonina found herself listening for each whistle to end, fearing the
worst, then letting her breath out when she heard someone else's life exploding.
Without trying, she gauged the distance and felt relief that she wasn't the bomb's
target, then almost at once came the next whistle, the next blast.
On the rare occasions she ventured out, she entered a film-like war, with
yellow smoke, pyramids of rubble, jagged stone cliffs where buildings once
stood, wind-chased letters and medicine vials, wounded people, and dead horses
with oddly angled legs. But nothing more unreal than this: hovering overhead,
what looked at first like snow but didn't move like snowflakes, something
delicately rising and falling without landing. Eerier than a blizzard, a bizarre soft
cloud of down feathers from the city's pillows and comforters gently swirled
above the buildings. Once, long ago, a Polish king repelled invading Turks by
attaching large feathered hoops to each soldier's back. As they galloped into
battle, the wind coursed through the false wings with a loud tornadic whirring
that spooked the enemy's horses, which dug in their hooves and refused to
advance. For many Warsawians, this feather storm may have conjured up the
slaughter of those knights, the city's guardian angels.
One day, after a live shell plunged into her building and stuck in the fourth
floor ceiling, she waited for an explosion that never came. That night, while
bombs sprayed smoke ropes across the sky, she moved Ryś to the basement of a
nearby church. Then, "in the strangled silence of the morning," she moved Rhyś
back again to the lampshade store. "I'm just like our lioness," she told the others,
"fearfully moving my cub from one side of the cage to the other."
No news came of Jan, and the worry allowed her little sleep, but she told
herself that she would fail him if she didn't save the zoo's remaining animals.
Were they even alive, she wondered, and could the teenage boys left in charge
really look after them? There seemed no choice: though queasy from fear, she
left Ryś with her sister-in-law and forced herself to cross the river amid gunfire
and shells. "This is how a hunted animal feels," she thought, caught in the melee,
"not like a heroine, just madly driven to get home safely at any cost." She
remembered the death of Jaś and the big cats, shot point-blank by Polish
soldiers. Visions of their last moments tortured her, and perhaps a fright harder
to dispel: What if they turned out to be the lucky ones?
