CHAPTER 3
ONE DAY ON HIS BICYCLE ROUNDS OF THE ZOO, JAN LEFT
ADAM the elk to graze on the lawn and shrubbery and entered the warm
birdhouse, redolent with moist hay and lime. There, a petite woman stood close
to a cage, moving her elbows in mimicry of the birds as they preened and posed.
With her dark wavy hair, compact body, and thin legs sticking out from the hem
of her smock, she almost qualified for enclosure herself. Bobbing on a trapeze
overhead, a walleyed parrot screeched: "What's your name? What's your name?"
And in a melodious voice, the woman piped back: "What's your name? What's
your name?" The parrot leaned down and eyed her hard, then turned its head and
fixed her with the other eye.
"Good day," Jan said. Dzień dobry. It's the way Poles began most polite
verbal exchanges. She introduced herself as Magdalena Gross, a name Jan knew
well, since Gross's sculptures were commissioned by wealthy Poles and
international admirers alike. He didn't know she sculpted animals, but then
neither did she before that day. Later she'd tell Antonina that when she first
visited the zoo she'd been so captivated that her hands had started molding air, so
she decided to bring her tools and go on safari, and fate led her to that enclosure
with birds streamlined like futuristic trains. Jan kissed her hand lightly according
to Polish custom, said it would honor him if she considered the zoo her open-air
studio and the animals her fidgety models.
By all accounts, tall, slender, fair Antonina looked like a Valkyrie at rest, and
short, dark, Jewish Magdalena vibrated with energy. Antonina saw Magdalena as
a winning array of contradictions: emphatic yet vulnerable, daring but modest,
zany yet highly disciplined, someone excited by life—which may be what
appealed most to Antonina, who wasn't as stoic or solemn as Jan. The two
women shared a passion for art and music, as well as a similar sense of humor,
were close in age, and had friends in common—thus began what would become
an important friendship. What would Antonina have served when Magdalena
joined her for tea? Most Warsawians offer black tea and sweets to guests, and
Antonina raised roses and jarred a lot of preserves, so at some point she's bound
to have prepared the traditional Polish pastry of soft doughnuts filled with a
layer of pink rose-petal jam and coated in an orange glaze that smells of fire.
Magdalena confided that she'd been feeling stale and uninspired, her creative
attic empty, when she happened by the zoo one day and saw a shocking flock of
flamingos strutting by. Beyond them roamed a dream-panoply of even stranger
animals—fabulous shapes, and hues more subtle than any painter could mix. The
spectacle hit her with all the power of revelation, and inspired a series of animal
sculptures that would win international acclaim.
THE ZOO LOOKED MAGNIFICENT by the summer of 1939, and Antonina
began making elaborate plans for the following spring, when she and Jan would
have the honor of hosting the International Association of Zoo Directors' annual
meeting in Warsaw. However, that meant pushing to the rim of awareness such
seismic fears as: if our world's still intact. Nearly a year earlier, in September
1938, when Hitler had seized Sudetenland, a part of Czechoslovakia bordering
Germany and populated mainly by Germans, France and Britain had acquiesced,
but Poles worried about their own borderlands. German territory ceded to Poland
during 1918–22 included eastern Silesia and the region formerly known as the
Pomeranian Corridor, an act that effectively separated East Prussia from the rest
of Germany. The important German Baltic port of Gdańsk had been declared a
"Free City," open to both Germans and Poles.
A month after he invaded Czechoslovakia, Hitler demanded the return of
Gdańsk and the right to build an extraterritorial road through the Corridor.
Diplomatic wrangling in early 1939 led to antagonism by March, when Hitler
secretly ordered his generals to "deal with the Polish question." Relations
between Poland and Germany gradually disintegrated and Poles awoke to omens
of war, a horrifying thought but not a new one. Germany had occupied Poland so
often since the Middle Ages, most recently in 1915–18, that Slavs fighting
Teutons had achieved the status of patriotic tradition. Cursed by its strategic
location in eastern Europe, Poland had been invaded, sacked, and carved up
many times, its borders ebbing and flowing; some village children learned five
languages just to speak with neighbors. War wasn't something Antonina wanted
to think about, especially since her last experience of war stole both of her
parents, so she assured herself, as most Poles did, of their solid alliance with
France, keeper of a powerful army, and Britain's sworn protection. Optimistic by
nature, she concentrated on her fortunate life. After all, in 1939, not many Polish
women could be thankful for a good marriage, a healthy son, and a satisfying
career, let alone a wealth of animals she regarded as stepchildren. Feeling
blessed and high-spirited, Antonina took Ryś, his aged nanny, and Zośka the St.
Bernard to the small popular vacation village of Rejentówka in early August,
while Jan stayed in Warsaw to oversee the zoo. She also decided to include
Koko, an elderly pink cockatoo prone to dizziness who often fell off her perch.
Because Koko had a nervous habit of plucking out her breast feathers, Antonina
dressed her in a metal collar that acted like a megaphone for squawks, and hoped
"the fresh forest air, getting to eat wild roots and twigs," might cure her ills and
return her colorful plumage. The by now full-grown lynxes stayed behind, but
she carted along a new arrival, a baby badger named Borsunio (Little Badger),
too young to leave unattended. Most of all, she wanted to spirit Ryś away from
Warsaw, rife with talk of war, for one last summer of innocent play in the
countryside, his and hers both.
The Żabińskis' country cottage nestled in a forest hollow four miles from a
wide gall in the Bug River, and only minutes from its small tributary, the Rz
dz
. Antonina and Ryś arrived on a hot summer day, with the smell of pine resin in
the air and waves of acacias and petunias in bloom, the last rays of sunlight
lighting the tips of old trees and darkness already fallen in the lower reaches of
the forest, where the shrill rib-music of cicadas mixed with the descending calls
of cuckoos and the whine of hungry female mosquitos.
A moment later, on one of the small verandas, she could submerge in the
shadow of a scented grapevine "smelling of its faint, hardly perceptible flowers,
but nicer than a rose, than lilac and jasmine, than the sweetest smell—golden
lupin from the field," while "only a few steps through the overgrown grass stood.
. .the forest wall, towering, young-green from the oak, slashed with white birch
here and there. . .." She and Ryś sank into the green quiet that seemed light-years
from Warsaw, a huge, internal, personal distance, not just miles. Without even a
radio in the cottage, nature provided the lessons, news, and games. One popular
local pastime involved going into the forest and counting the aspens.
Each summer the cottage awaited them with dishes, pots, a washtub, sheets,
and a large surplus of dry provisions, and they provided the ensemble of human
and animal characters that transformed it from bungalow to burlesque. After they
settled the large birdcage stand on the veranda and fed the cockatoo bits of
orange, Ryś attached a halter to the badger and tried to persuade it to walk on a
leash, which it did, but only in reverse, pulling Ryś along at speed. Like the other
animals in her circle, Badger warmed to Antonina, who referred to him as her
"foster child" and taught him to come to his name, paddle with them in the river,
and climb up onto her bed to nurse from a bottle. Badger taught himself to
scratch at the front door to be let out for toileting, and he bathed sitting back in a
washtub, human style, while splashing sudsy water against his chest with both
arms. In her diary, she noted how Badger's instincts mixed with human customs
and his own one-of-a-kind personality. Scrupulous about toileting, for instance,
he dug one toilet hole on each side of the house and galloped home from long
walks just to use them. But one day, when she couldn't find Badger, she checked
all of his usual daytime napping places—a drawer in the linen closet, between
her bed's sheet and duvet cover, in Ryś's nanny's suitcase—with no success. In
Ryś's bedroom, she stooped to look under the bed and glimpsed Badger pushing
Ryś's training potty out into the open, climbing onto the white enamel bowl, and
using it as it was intended.
Near the end of summer vacation, Ryś's friends Marek and Zbyszek (sons of
a doctor who lived on the other side of Praski Park) stopped by on their way
home from Hel Peninsula on the Baltic Sea, full of chatter about the many ships
moored in Gdynia harbor, the smoked fish and sailing trips, and all the changes
to the waterfront. Sitting in the dimly lit living room while night slipped around
her, Antonina overheard the boys on the porch steps talking about their summer
adventures, and she realized that for Ryś the Baltic Sea he'd visited three years
earlier probably existed only as a hazy memory that included the crashing surf
and the glassy heat of noon sand.
"You won't believe how they've dug up the beach! Next year there won't be a
civilian on it," Marek said.
"But why?" Ryś asked.
"To build fortifications, for war!"
His older brother eyed him hard, and Marek wrapped an arm around Ryś's
shoulder and said dismissively: "But who cares about the beach. Tell us about
Badger instead."
And so Ryś began, stuttering a little at first, then developing animation and
speed, to tell of forest pirates and the shenanigans of Badger, culminating in the
night Badger spilled a bedside bucket of cold water onto a sleeping neighbor
lady he'd crawled into bed with, and the boys fell together, twitching with
laughter.
"It feels good to hear them laughing," Antonina thought, "but this perpetual
splinter poking into Ryś—the war—it's still a murky idea to him. He only
associates words like torpedo and fortifications with toys, the beautiful ships he
floats in bays surrounding the sand forts he builds along the shore of the Rz dz .
And there's his enchanting game of cowboys and Indians when he shoots
pinecones with bow and arrow. . .but the other possibility, of a real war, that he
doesn't understand yet, thank heavens."
The older boys believed, as Antonina did, that war belonged to the world of
adults, not children. She sensed that Ryś yearned to grill them with questions,
though he didn't want to look stupid or, worse, like a little kid, so he kept quiet
about the invisible hand grenade lying at his feet that everyone feared might
explode.
"What a subject to be broached by the innocent lips of children," Antonina
reflected, glancing at the sun-bronzed faces of the three boys, glistening in the
light cast by a large oil lamp. "Grazed by sadness" about their safety, she
wondered yet again: "What will become of them, if war begins?" It was a
question she'd been denying, sidestepping, and rewording for months. "Our
animal republic," she finally admitted to herself, "exists in the busiest and most
buzzing Polish city, as a small autonomous state defended by the capital. Living
behind its gates, as if on an island cut off from the rest of the world, it seems
impossible the waves of evil spilling across Europe could overwhelm our little
island as well." As darkness began seeping into everything, erasing edges, a free
floating anxiety plagued her; eager as she was to mend the fabric of her son's life
the instant holes formed, she could only await the unraveling.
She meant the last idylls of summer to be well spent, so the next morning
she organized a mushroom-hunting brigade, with prizes and honors for whoever
bagged the most saffron milk-cap, boletus, and button mushrooms, which she
planned to jar. If war did erupt, spreading mushroom marinade on bread in
winter would fill everyone with cottage memories of river swims, Badger's
antics, and better days. They hiked four miles to the Bug River, with Ryś carried
piggyback at times, Zośka trotting alongside, and Badger riding in a knapsack.
Stopping by meadows along the way, they picnicked and played soccer, with
Badger and Zośka serving as goalies, though Badger battled fiercely over the
leather ball once he latched onto it with teeth and claws.
Most summer weekends, Antonina left Ryś with his nanny in the country
and returned to Warsaw to spend a few days alone with Jan. On Thursday,
August 24, 1939, the same day Britain renewed its pledge to aid Poland if
Germany invaded, Antonina made her usual visit to Warsaw, where, to her
shock, she saw antiaircraft sites ringing the city, civilians digging trenches and
erecting barricades, and, most disturbing of all, posters that announced an
imminent draft. Only the day before, foreign ministers Ribbentrop and Molotov
had stunned the world by revealing that Germany and the Soviet Union had
signed a nonaggression pact.
"The only thing dividing Berlin from Moscow is Poland," she thought.
Neither she nor Jan knew of the pact's secret clauses, already hacking up
Poland after a two-stage invasion and divvying up its desirable farmlands.
"Diplomats are cagey. This might only be a bluff," she thought.
Jan knew Poland hadn't the planes, weapons, or war equipment to compete
with Germany, and so they started talking seriously about sending Ryś
somewhere safer, to a town of no military interest, if such a place existed.
Antonina felt as though she were "waking from a long dream, or entering a
nightmare," either way a psychic earthquake. Vacationing far from the political
clatter of Warsaw, cocooned in "the calm, level order of the farmer's life, the
harmony of white sand dunes and weeping willows," with each day enlivened by
eccentric animals and a little boy's adventures, it had been nearly possible to
ignore world events, or at least stay optimistic about them, even stubbornly
naïve.
